Public health infrastructure (PHI) serves as the core foundation for essential public health and its services. However, the U.S. PHI has been weakened by understaffing, underfunding, limited resources and partnerships, and outdated data and information systems over the past few decades. The recent COVID-19 pandemic exacerbated its vulnerability and weakened nature, resulting in increased health disparities and worse health outcomes in general for the nation.
The goal of this study was to identify elements of local PHI that are associated with the completion of 20 key public health activities while adjusting for state differences.
Cross-sectional secondary data were acquired and linked from two national surveys of local health departments, the National Profile of Local Health Departments survey as well as the National Longitudinal Survey of Public Health Systems. In total, 20 multivariable logistic regression models were created to analyze the relationships between variables. State fixed effects were used in multivariable models to control for differences in state-level legislation.
Several public health services or activities, modes of provisions, and staffing elements were strongly correlated with the completion of best practice activities. It was found that state differences affected the correlations between infrastructure variables and best practices, while rurality of jurisdiction was not statistically correlated with the completion of any best practices. These findings will add to the discussion of what the minimum necessary elements of PHI may be.
